Okay, Mr. Irvin, would you tell us your full name,
the date and place of your birth? My name is Barlow
Irvin. I was born in Cotulla, Texas on December 31,
1903. And could you tell us a little bit about your
early boyhood there in Cotulla and possibly about
your elementary education on up through high
school? Well, we lived on the Irvin Ranch up until
about 1909. And then we moved to Cotulla, Texas
where I spent two years and entered Cotulla public
schools at the age of seven. At that time I
contacted typhoid fever and remained in Cotulla
for about three months while the rest of my family
moved on to San Antonio where I spent most of my
early boroughhood days. And can you remember
anything about your education there? In San
Antonio? Yeah, in San Antonio. Well, we moved to
2001 Main Avenue, which was right across the
street from the Travis Elementary School. And I
entered there after arriving in San Antonio and
started my elementary education at Travis
School. I might say at this time that all my sisters
went through there and also two of my sons. How many
brothers and sisters did you have? I had three
sisters, no brothers. No brothers. I see. And you
have how many children now? I have two sons, one
named John Jordan, named after my father, and the
other named Barlow Jr. They both live in Dallas.
One's in the insurance business and one is an
attorney. Could you tell us your mother's name? My
mother's name was Edna Barlow Irving. Edna
Barlow, and she was born in De Niro, Texas in
January, I mean July the 7th,
1875. You know your father's birthday. My father
was John Jordan Irving. He was born July the 4th,
1872 in Sagin, Texas. I see. Now, after- You went to
elementary school then. Did you go on into high
school? Yes, after that was done, I left Travis
School and went to what they called Old Main Avenue
High School, which was situated about a mile and a
half from my home toward the city, central part of
the city. At those days, they didn't have but one
high school. That was Old Main Avenue High School.
But in 1918, they built another high school called
Brackenridge High School, which was situated on
the south side of the city. Do you remember
anything from your high school experiences? Yes,
and when I went to high school I remember, of
course, at an early age I took part in athletics,
and when I entered high school I was just fourteen
and a half years old.
I remember the first football team I played on. I
was a freshman at the Old Main Avenue, and that was
during the war, 1917 and 1918.
And, of course, we didn't have any place to
practice. We went to Brackman Park to do our
practicing. And what I remember about that
particular year was that it was during the war, and
we had a coach whose name was Mr. Vinnie.
B-E-N-N-E, Benny, who was an old Haskell Indian
coach at that time. And he was in the service, in the
armed services and situated at Camp Travis in San
Antonio. He wasn't officially, well he wasn't an
army man, but he was connected with the
In the second year, I played basketball,
football, and baseball there. In the second and
third year, we always had different coaches. The
best team we had there was 1922 when we went to the
state quarterfinals. This is in football? In
football. Could you tell us a little bit about
football, high school football in those days?
Well,
in San Antonio at that time, there was only one high
school, two high schools later after 1918, 1919,
1920, and 21. And we had what they called the
Academic League, which involved the two high
schools, San Antonio Academy, West Texas
Military Academy, and Peacock Military Academy.
And besides playing what was called the Academic
League, And then later on, then we played smaller
schools around that area in San Antonio. Football
in those days was a practice.
The last coach I had was a man named Spitz Clark, who
was a University of Texas coach and played with the
famed 2nd Texas Infantry. Probably not many
people remember that team, but it was during the
war at that time and amassed a very, very great
record in army football and service football at
that time. And they had mostly the players were
from the Texas schools and they had four or five
outstanding ones from Texas A&M. I see. Then after
you graduated from high school, then did you go on
directly to A&M? Yes, after I graduated from high
school, I came to A&M here in the fall of 1922. Why
did you come to A&M? Why here? Well, because of two
or three reasons. One, because I had a ranching
background. All my forefathers and fathers and
grandparents were ranch people. And secondly, I
had friends that were coming here. And thirdly, I
was interested in some form of agriculture, which
I didn't ever pursue. Did you have any thoughts
then of playing football when you came here? Yes,
that was one of the reasons I came here. At that
time, Mr. Bible was coach, and
I was very much involved in athletics and in
football at that time, and I came here. You see, at
that time A&M had just beaten Center College, as
you probably know, and they were a nationally
known team, and I wanted to come to A&M because of
Mr. Bible. He was the head coach here at that time,
and the fact that A&M had made a wonderful record up
to 1922, you see. And I had visions of playing and
making my letter here, besides going to school.
Okay, when you started, what were some of your
first impressions when you arrived in 1922 of the
university? Well, Helen, at that time the only way
you could come to A&M was by train. The Missouri
Pacific and Southern came here by train from San
Antonio and we used to get off at Milano Junction
and switched and came down and picked the train
that came out of Fort Worth down here. And it was, we
got off at the old station which has been torn down
at the west end of the campus right across, the old
tracks are still there.
A&M was a school for me because of the traditions
and the heritage that they had. At that time there
were a number of people from the high school that I
attended that came here too. Do you remember how
your first days and weeks here, how it impressed
you? What experiences you had as a freshman? Well,
I came here.
And one reason I got in that was because the first
sergeant was Fred Jagie. He was a teacher here in
the veterinarian, in the veterinarian
department now. Coach retired. And I knew him
quite well because I played football with him in
high school.
and I happened to be his room orderly my freshman
year, and I lived next door to him. But A&M at that
time was
purely military, because I never did acquire any,
never did go over high military because I wasn't
interested in it very much. The only thing they had
in those days was what they called the casuals,
they were people
I forgot the names of those two dormitories they
had there, but Military Walker and everything was
military at that time. And during my freshman
year, of course, it was pretty, the hazing was
pretty severe.
The fact of the business, the more they haze you,
the better
they liked you. Oh, my. Of course at that time they
had what they called the Junior Banquet. Are you
familiar with that? The old Junior Banquet? No
sir, I'm not. Well that was when the president had
this Junior Banquet and they had a whole week of it.
They tried to get the headmaster of the Junior
Banquet or the president of it, or he would be
disguised and they would try to catch him, you see,
before he went into this banquet on a certain
particular day. And of course, everybody was
involved in it, including the freshmen. And it
was, they finally did away with the junior banquet
because it was really gotten out of hand and the
people in the authorities finally did away with
it. But A&M at that time was just, it was, I wouldn't
call it a cow college, but it was a great
institution. And most of the times, the military
end of it, and plus the educational end of it, had
grown immensely. And it was a, you look back, A&M
today is not the A&M of the 20s. We all know that.
Well, did you start playing football your
freshman year? Yes, I played football under
Colonel Frank Anderson. Colonel Frank Anderson.
He still lives here, and he was a track coach. Oh, I
see. What was this then, a freshman team? A
freshman team. You see, back in those days, they
had a freshman team. And what I'm reminded about
the freshman team was that after we had won, A&M had
gotten All this publicity, or you might say
national recognition on account of beating Santa
College. And on that team, we had about 18, I think
about 15 to 18 high school captains that came here
to be a member of the freshman team. And we had a good
season. We played six or seven games and didn't
lose but won. I think that was Sam Houston College
at that time. Can you remember some of the other
opponents you played? I played the Port Arthur
Pirates, that was the semi-pro team at Port
Arthur. Mm-hmm. San Houston State Teachers, St.
Edward's, Allen Academy.
I don't know, I played five games. Mm-hmm. And then
when you moved into your sophomore year, did you
then move up to the varsity then? Yes, I moved up to
the varsity. See, in those days, Mr. Bible was the
owner. He was the head coach, and we had a line
coach. We didn't have many coaches. And he didn't
give many letters. See, all the three years that I
lettered in football, he didn't give over 15
varsity letters.
And so it was pretty tough to make. My sophomore
year, there weren't but three of us that lettered
that year, and one was Norman Dansby, who lived in
Bryan, and one was Mule Wilson, who later played
professional football. And myself was only three
sophomores that lettered that year. What were the
requirements for lettering at that time? Do you
remember? Was it a personal thing? Well, yes, it
was. You had to—we really didn't have any—well, it
did, too. I have the rules out there in the
university now. We have the rules that were set up.
But during the 20s, I don't think we had any exact
rules. You had to play so many minutes. It finally
went into that you had to play so many minutes. And I
know my year that I lettered, my sophomore year,
because I played most of the Rice game after Bull
Johnson, who was supposed to have been one of the
All-Southwest Conference guards.
beat a seven to nothing. That was the first defeat
they had by a conference team in 1923. And then it
went on in 24 and we had a very fairly good team that
year. The records indicate I think we had about a
seventh, had a six for four record. But most of
these players that In 1924, we were defeated in
Austin
by a score of seven to nothing. And that was
beginning—that's when the Memorial Stadium was
dedicated, actually. That was the first year,
1924. It was also the beginning of the Memorial
Stadium jinx. Yeah, that's right. And it was a
peculiar game. The game seesawed back and forth.
We had a little boy named Bob Berry threw a pass and
it deflected. No, Texas threw a pass and our
defensive man deflected the ball and it went into
the arms of one of the Texas players and he ran for
touchdown and that was all of it. Seven to nothing.
In those days the scores weren't very high. Did you
play both ways then? Yes, we played both ways. We
didn't have any offense and defense.
In fact, you had to be in pretty fair shape. Of
course, your opponent had to be in good shape too
because you made substitutions. They weren't
substituted as a whole team. Individually, they
were substituted mostly.
The Southwest Conference has grown
tremendously. In those days, A&M and Texas,
either one of them won the conference, up until
Baylor and SMU got into the picture. And that's
when Ray Morrison started his, Ray Morrison was
the coach at SMU when he had his good teams in 23, and
I forgot the other one, he won the Southwest
Conference. And then Frank Bridges came along at
Baylor. and won the conference in 22 and 24, I
believe. That's to my recollection, to show it in
there. But they got into, they were tired of A&M and
Texas dominating the athletic scene, so they got
into this, what we call now,
proselytizing. I don't wanna. Is this maybe the
beginning of the heavy recruiting? Yes. And I hate
to say this, but it's the starting of it. You see,
during those days, everybody paid their own way.
See, it was an honor to win your varsity letter, but
the boys that played football in those days, we
didn't have anything such as scholarship. That
was unknown in those days.
I might say that SMU and Baylor and some of these
other schools, in order to keep step with the other
two state schools, they started giving
scholarships, which enticed the players to their
institution. I see. Now at this time, when you were
playing football at A&M, did you live with the
other members of the cadet corps? Oh, yes. Do you
think this was a good thing? Yes, I do. Except
during the football season, and I haven't got up to
the 25 team yet, but we would live in what they call
the postgraduate hall, which is located, was
located by where the old hospital was. They call it
the graduate hall. A lot of the professionals
lived there. And during the season, we would move
over there for three months and then move back
there
I'm saying for the players to live with it. Don't
you think maybe it kept you closer to the rest of the
student body? Yes, it would have because I
know in my case, I got to know the roommates and then
also the people in my dormitory after the season
was over, I became just one of them. And they were
more interested in me.
there, fellow?
It's probably too bad. I doubt if it would work
anymore today, but it's an interesting idea.
Well, see it's like everything else, it's grown
out of proportion and I doubt very seriously
whether it would work now. You see, as we get to this
new dormitory we have here, things are just out of
proportion. It's not like it used to Yes, I
suppose. That's progress, you see. Now, would you
tell us about the 25 team? Well, up to 25, you see, we
hadn't had a good team in 23 and 24. And this 25 team
was mostly, a good many of them were the boys that
came here as freshmen. We played together. And the
25 team, we weren't a very outstanding team, but we
were good enough to win the Southwest Conference,
which we hadn't won since back in
Neil Wilson, who was a great punter and a great
football player, and a little boy by the name of Bob
Berry. He wasn't over five feet five. And the other
one, we had a Japanese named Taro Kishi who played a
lot. He was a Japanese boy. And he played one
halfback, and Wilson the other, and we had a little
boy named McGuire playing fullback. Barry. But
what made that team finally gel was the fact that
Keisha got hurt right before we played Baylor. And
into the lineup came Joel Hunt, who you've known
about. As goes the saying, be in the right place at
the right time. Up to that time, Joel was unknown
because he had been in Waco High School and he was
sort of understudied to, I forgot the name of that,
Booty Johnson up there. But we were playing Baylor
at that time, and up to that part of the season, we
hadn't been defeated. But Kisha got hurt, and they
inserted Joel in there, and he just ran wild. He
scored two touchdowns on pretty good-sized runs,
which we didn't have that then. We won the game
14-7. From then on, we gained momentum, and we
continued on and won the rest of our games. except
for TCU in which there was a high wind blowing and
they beat us three to nothing on the field goal. But
we came back and defeated Rice and then defeated
Texas 28 to nothing, the biggest score that's ever
been run up against Texas in the history of A&M and
Texas series. So we won the conference
Did you play any bowl games, any bowl games that
year? No, the bowl game was not, they hadn't come
into existence at that time. There were a few
around occasionally, weren't they? Yeah. But
they weren't every year. See the Cotton Bowl
didn't, bowls didn't start until the thirties,
thirties. I think T.C. and Marquette played the
first bowl game. What do you think was your best
game? Oh, I don't know.
You must have one game you felt that stood out, that
you felt you played your best in. Well, I guess I
wasn't, I was just good in the state, but I wasn't an
outstanding football player. I mean, I guess that
the best game I played was when I was a sophomore
against Texas. Hm. They put me into the lineup when
they had the ball on the one yard line. Mm-hm.
mind stood out that way. I would think so.
Especially if they ran at your position each time.
Well now after you graduated, what did you do? Well
I went back to San Antonio and then
this fella named Jim Kendricks who was quite a
character. He had been playing professional
football up in New York in the east for about 10
years
And so he had been given the position as the coach
and manager of the Buffalo Bisons, who was a member
of the National Professional Football Team. And
he gathered up a bunch of A&M, three A&M players,
myself, Neil Wilson, and Neely Allison, and we had
about five from Oklahoma and one from Trinity. And
we didn't, I don't think we had a Texas boy, and we
had four from Baylor that had played in 1922. Top
Weathers, and Wesley Bradshaw, and Riley Biggs,
and another one I'll think of in a minute. And we
didn't have the 16 or 17 players. But the unique
thing about this whole deal was that we traveled in
Model D cars. Had to start out in advance, didn't
you? Yeah, and so this fellow, he was a character in
himself.
We started out and we had four Model Ts. We started
from Texas and those Model Ts. And in this group of
18 players we had, two of them were players, but
they were mostly mechanics.
Recruited for your mechanical ability. That's
good. So we went to, we started out and I remember
going on up to Buffalo and of course it was an
experience for me.
And Kendricks was a player and coach and manager,
but he was a hard taskmaster. He had been coached
under Charlie Moran, who had quite a history here
at A&M. He was sort of a disciple of Moran. And at
heart, he was good, but he was strict. And we really
got into, we would practice. We'd get up, and I want
to have two meals a day, and we all stayed in this one
big boarding house on Main Street in Buffalo, and
we would get up in the morning and eat late
breakfast around 10.30. And then go to the
practice field and practice until one-thirty at
two and then come back and have our evening meal
around four-thirty at
five. And we would go to every place we played. And
in those days they had the New York Giants and the
Yankees and the Buffalo, Chicago Bears,
Minnesota,
I'm trying to think what they called those,
Eskimos, Duluth Eskimos, and Providence, Rhode
Island, Pottsville Miners, and those were some of
the teams that were in the league. But it was the
National Football League at those times. The
salaries weren't good. I think most of us players
all of our expenses up there were taken care of. But
that's, you just got paid for a game, not for- For a
game, that's right. And the things I can remember
about that game was that league we played all over
the East. And we had a good season. We finished
third in the league, about 15 players. But the
thing I remember about it, the only time we ever
went but trained was we played Now the
Philadelphia team was called—it
was right out of Philadelphia, but it finally won
the team championship. It was named—what was the
name of that team? It was in Philadelphia, but it
was a serve over in Philadelphia. I'll think about
it in a minute. But we played, and this team was
coached by Charlie Moran,
who had coached Kendricks at A&M. We played this
team in Buffalo on a Saturday and then returned the
game in Philadelphia on a Sunday.
And we made the trip, and McKendrick said, now
boys, we're going to go by first class. We're not
going to ride any Model T's anymore. We're going to
go by train. So we had 18 players, I think, counting
the two mechanics and everything, going with us.
And we went down to the station. We were going to
leave that night and ride all night.
got on the train, and he said, well, we haven't got
the ten tickets for births. This is all true then.
So he said, now all the guys are going to start
regularly. They're going to have a lower birth,
and the guys are going to be substitutes. They're
going to be under the birth. So that's the way we
went down to Philadelphia.
So when the season was over,
Jim, he said, well, we'll just play all the way back
to Texas, which we did.
He was a great Indian player. We played his team
there twice, once in Oklahoma City and once in Paul
Husky. And then we came on back and played in San
Antonio and played down, far down.
Kendricks. Kendricks, they fired him up there
because he, all these cars he brought back, he
wasn't crooked or anything. He just, he thought if
anything belonged to him, belonged to you,
belonged to him, see. But anyhow, there was some
kind of mix-up in the management of it. So
Kendricks wasn't hired back the next year.
So,
Alice and myself got together Neil Allison, he
played here in 24. So we had a phone call. You want to
hear this? Yeah, yeah. Go ahead. It's
fascinating. Huh? Go ahead. You don't want to put
it in there? Yeah, I do. It's interesting. I don't
think there's anything like this on record. Go
ahead. So he rang us and said, now listen, I'm going
back on up there, and it says that Why don't you come
on up here and go with us?" So the Buffalo people had
sent us our travel expenses. I think it was $60 in
those days. That's a lot of money. So
Neely Allison was living in Denton, Texas. We'd
been working together all during the summer, and
he'd been living in Denton, Texas. So I went on up to
Waco, and Jim was living in Waco.
So when I got there, I said, Jim, the first thing he
said was, I said, let's go down to the express
office and express your baggage to Buffalo. I
said, I've got the money. I'm going to ride a truck.
He said, oh, don't throw them on the way on trains. I
said, well, heck, wait. There's freight trains
coming through here today, tonight. He said,
we'll just ride that freight train. I said, no, I
don't. I said, I got it. Well, he talked me into it,
so I went down there and I expressed my baggage to
Buffalo, and so that evening I remember the first
time I'd been at A&M, but I hadn't ridden. I'd been a
freight train rider. So we went out to catch the
freight train, and it was going up a big hill, and so
we got on there, got on one of these flat cars, I
mean, where they carry coal, you know. meantime he
had talked, phoned Neely and he was sort of a pretty
religious boy, I mean very clean morally and
everything else, but of course he was a football
player. So we got into Fort Worth, we finally got
off the train and we got off this train because we
had to catch this Sunset, this Texas Special that
went through Denton all the way on up
We finally managed to get off the freight train.
You know, in those days, they'd pick you up for
riding freight trains. See, they'd pick you up. So
we finally got off after I stumbled around and fell
over some rails. And so we were riding Neely, and
Jim did, and told him that we was coming through on
the Texas Special, I think, at a certain, certain
time leaving Fort Worth. So I said, Jim, well, we
might as well buy a ticket. And he said, no, no. We'd
get on the back end of this tender.
So we got on the tender and rode into Denton. Of
course, Neely was down there all dressed up and had
all his baggage and everything.
Jim got off and he was all smutty and dirty, you
know, cinders and everything. Of course, he had
his mother down there and his girlfriend.
Of course, when he saw Jim, he was horrified.
So Jim came running back before the train was
pulling out and said, well, I guess we're going to
have to stay all night here. Neely won't get on the
train with us, so I'll make it short. No, go ahead.
This is a good story. And so he got off. We got off and
went up and spent the night on the hotel. And so that
morning early, Miss Allison rang in and said,
but this fella Kendrick's can't ride with you
boys, and we'll let you have the Ford pickup to go on
to providing that Jim gets out of town. See, she was
mad at Jim, see. So I told Jim, I said, Jim, the best
thing for you to do is leave, although you're going
with us. He said, well, okay, I'll be seeing you
guys. So we thought he was going on hitched another
freight train or something along. The next
morning we about, oh it must have been about 10 or 11
o'clock, Neely came by and we went to the hotel and
picked us up. So we started out and got out of town
about five miles and there was Kendrick.
So we picked him up. But the worst, the whole thing
about the story, in those days they had a
two-seater and then they had a rumble seat. You
call it a rumble seat and you call it a trunk now in
the back. rumble seat all the way to Buffalo. How
long did it take you to drive? About two and a half,
three days. That's pretty quick. Yeah. Jim went on
and so he, I don't know whatever happened to him on
that particular deal, but the story all entwined.
So we went ahead and played that season, but the
middle of the season while we were playing Red
Grains team there and it come a terrific snowstorm
and the game was canceled. And so...
It didn't amount to much. Can you remember how many
fans you had at the games? What kind of crowds? Oh,
we had six, seven thousand, four, five, six
thousand people. Was that a pretty good crowd in
those days? Do you remember what they paid
admission? If I can remember, of course I think it
was around a dollar, a dollar and a half, two
dollars. They didn't have much expense. See, in
those days, the headliners made the money like
grain. Brick Muller and those people like that,
that were all American, they are the ones that drew
the big money. Just the average. There weren't
many of them. There weren't many of them.
So we went on after this man went on up and joined the
semi-pro team at Harvard, Connecticut and stayed
there for four or five games. And we had a lot of
experiences. And then when Alex and Seth started
St. Mary's University was looking for a football
coach. By chance, they hired Kendricks.
Those were the kind of experiences we had out
there. So you went to work at St. Mary's then?
Assistant football coach. How long did you stay at
St. Mary's? Well, Jim didn't last but about six
months.
Oh, he had a great thing. He was a great individual.
I mean, he was a personal friend of mine, but he
was an adult with a child's mind on some things that
he did that were out there. I could tell you all
about it, but anyhow, after the football season
was over, they let him go and made me head football
coach. What kind of coach was Kendricks? He was all
right. He was a good conditioner. But he was the
type of guy that thought he, he wasn't really
realistic and sound in his thinking. And all the
football he had learned was under Moran. And we
used to, after the first year he was out there, we
used to get those boys up and running a mile every
morning for breakfast. He was a good conditioner,
and he had some good points about him. But he
wasn't, He wasn't realistic and he didn't have
good judgment on a lot of things. Let me drop back a
minute and ask you about Bible. We kind of glanced
over him. Well, I expect DX, I think he was the best
all around. You see, there's different types of
coaches. There's a
loved him and believed in him. And then there's a
type of coach that was just flamboyant, you might
say, just didn't have anything. But Bible was a, he
was, see, DX came to A&M
as a coach. He started his coaching career as a
player.
Mississippi College. And then he brought Frank
over here when he came here in 1916 or 17. But D.X.
was a, was my type of coach. He wasn't a bear, but
gave the rules and regulations, you better not
break them. And then there's the fellow down here
that is more or less a fatherly coach that you
respected and put out for. And our Bible was a great
coach during that time. And he was a gentleman
coach. A gentleman coach, that's what I would call
him. A gentleman coach. Gained your respect
easily. I don't know of anybody that played at A&M
that didn't respect and love the X, without a
doubt. Then how long were you head coach now at St.
Mary's? I coached there in 28, 29, 30, and 31. Do you
remember anything about that? Yes, I had very good
luck there. I coached everything at that time.
Basketball, baseball, and football.
a season by playing DePaul University in Chicago
in the Soldiers Field. And what I remember about
that was that Notre Dame, we played on Sunday. I'm
not a Catholic.
We went up there, and the thing I remember about
that was Notre Dame and Southern Cal was playing on
Saturday at Soldiers Field. Although I had
practiced my team, my wife and some of the brothers
and some of the other people who went along with the
team saw that game. I think they had the biggest
crowd they ever had, 120,000 people. And that's
when— Tremendous in those days. Yeah. And that was
when Rockne, you know, if you don't remember, but
he had been sick. I know who he was.
We went up on a train and came back on a train. Did you
play at mainly other church schools then? No, we
played Sam Houston Teachers, and we played Texas
A&I, and we played St. Edward's, and we played
DePaul University, Schreiner Institute, which
was a big
most of the state schools, Sol Ross, teams like
that. Well, the second year we had a good team, and
the third year the Depression hit us. And the
brothers called me in one day and said, well, I'm
sure, I hate to show, but
we've got notice from the authorities in St.
Louis, see their head school was in, I don't know
what you call them, the school was in St. Louis, and
that they had to dispose of football on account of
the economy move. So they had to let you go there?
Well, yeah. They stopped all sports? All sports.
And they never did continue on until way back in the
late 40s when they started back again. I see. Let me
stop a minute and turn my tape over. I'm about to run
out on one side.